page : yes
menu : no
tags: letters
permalink : letters/26-1-19

# a letter

26-1-19

my dear friend

it is great to hear from you.  
it is always good to get an email from you — the longer the better! and you always have something interesting to say.

i think one of the ways in which losing a person you love through death is better than losing someone because your relationship with them ends is that if they are alive you worry about them and you think they might be sad, you know they are, and you wish you could be there for them and make them feel better, make them feel they are not alone. but there is nothing you can do for them anymore and that is really heartbreaking.

in your case : he is dead. he is not out there in the world somewhere. strictly speaking you cannot say he is at peace because being dead he is not anything but i like the tradition of saying 'rest in peace', it is kind of calming and the truth is : he is no longer suffering, he does not have to haul his worn out body around any more, he is no longer struggling for breath. and you can be consoled by that. 

it is not that he wanted to die, not especially, but he knew it was coming soon. he still had enough interest and pleasure in being in the world to want it to continue for a while yet and he was like that the whole time i knew him, but the last time i saw him i knew : not too much longer.

and i expect when death came to him he accepted it. he knew it was time. he did not leave you. but it was time for him to go. and you knew it too.

why am i even writing this?  
i wish i was there to console you.  
i wish i could console myself.  
sometimes in consoling another, we console oursleves.

i've been thinking about something for my book on death and dying, did i tell you it is going to be called 'the art of (not) dying'? this is about when someone ends their life and if you love them it takes a lot of work not to feel like they are leaving you, rejecting you. they are not saying : i don't want to be with you any more.

and this is so very difficult to accept for the ones left behind, if they love you, that you choose this which means that they can no longer give you what you need in order to make it bearable for you to be in the world. 

and if you have an ego you may feel crushed, if you have a need to be accepted, acknowledged by someone, you could feel rejected and hurt. if you find it difficult to be alone, you could be miserable.

and in the latter case it is not that different to being left by a lover, do you agree? but in that case you may have hopes that they will change their mind (not that i have any) or that you can make them change their mind/psyche/soul/spirit somehow (no hope of that either) or you may be angry about it. you may be bitter. not that i am — i am just sad. i am bereft, which is like being bereaved in some important ways, it is no coincidence that the words are almost the same. 

don't worry. i am ok. some days are worse than others. some days are ok. some days i feel like i am expanding in the spaces that are afforded me now, being alone. some days i am barely functional. 

i think what you are referring to as 'my zen thing' which is helpful in a sense is that i am not convinced that i exist, i mean i know there is an 'i function' : i shower regularly and i eat. i pay my health insurance. i watch tv and movies. i try and read a book. i am still writing. and something responds when you call my name or my number or when you write me an email — or not, depending on where i am at.

so i will continue to sit with this alone, and feel what-appears-to-be-me feeling and to think what-appears-to-be-me thinking. 

is that 'zen' enough for you?  
or is that enough 'zen'?  
:)

thinking of you and hoping you're ok.  
big squeezy hug.  
x   
johannes

ps i am posting a version of this letter on my website, just because it is sometimes useful and good for someone else to be able to read someone's letter, even or especially if they don't know the people involved. not that i am saying this will be, but isn't it good to make something possible? isn't that all we can do in our so-called lives? to make spaces where something can unfold, where some things can connect, interact, intra-act. i said to some people today, this is what i do now, this is all i can do and i remain radically optimistic that to create possibilities, to make spaces, and to listen, is my calling. do you remember that time i made a space for him to tell you he loved you?